The modern production of ceramics developed in 
Vietri, when it was still an administrative part of 
the City of Cava, during the fifteenth and sixteenth 
centuries. It probably spread from nearby Cilento, 
which at the time was famous for the manufacture 
of tiles and bricks, thanks to the large deposits of 
high quality clays to be found in the area. But it 
was not a new skill to the area, for it had been 
practised on a commercial basis two thousand 
years earlier by the Etruscans, who had conquered 
and colonised the city of Marcina. The Etruscans 
were highly skilled craftsmen in pottery, probably 
taking their knowledge in ceramics and majolica 
directly from Cretan descendants on the island of 
Majorca in the western Mediterranean. The tech-
nique they imported from these island craftsmen, 
probably through contacts with sailors bringing 
such ware to the Abbey at Badia in the eleventh 
century, was that of adding an impermeable, hard, 
multi-coloured glaze to the pottery. Techniques 
were refined in the sixteenth century, through the 
application of turning-machines and an increased 
sophistication in the use of colour. "Faenza" ma-
jolica began to be applied to the manufacturing 
process, this having the added quality of giving a 
harder and cleaner surface to the pottery. The Vie-
tri potters were masters in the production of other 
products, notably "Sicilian" articles, such as food 
containers, household articles, plates and other 
similar products, with trade secrets in the produc-
tion process being handed down from generation to 
generation. A splendid example of their work can 
be found at the Church of San Michele, at Anaca-
pri, where there is flooring, dating from 1619, de-
picting an earthly paradise. Even today, modern 
technology has difficulty in copying the vivacity of 
the yellow colouring commonly used by those ear-
lier craftsmen. In the 1920s and 1930s, new impe-
tus to a dying industry in the area was provided by 
Irene Kowalski, who brought in new styles and 
products. Today, there are numerous small ceramic 
producers, who consciously resist the urge toward 
mechanisation of their products. Emphasis is still 
being kept on maintaining the "hand-made" tradi-
tions ceramic production of Cava and Vietri, which 
are world-renowned for their artistic merit and 
quality of craftsmanship, such as Bucciarelli ce-
ramics, being some of the most sought-after prod-
ucts of their type. Many of the articles available for 
purchase or commission today are "one-offs" in 
terms of design, colour and quality.
