A local poet, Alfonso de Sio, wrote "La Divina 
Commedia Cavese", in which he recounted events 
surrounding a meeting with Emilio Di Mauro, an 
upstanding citizen of Cava, who was the first per-
son to start a printing business in the city. Under 
his sons, Antonio and Armando, to whom he left 
the business in1929, the business grew to be a 
major Italian player. "Di Mauro Graphic Arts", as 
the company is known today, was really the child 
of Antonio Di Mauro. It was he who made the 
company what it is today. Unfortunately, he was 
not around to see the results of his work, this task 
being left to his brother, Armando. Armando Di 
Mauro - "Renato" to his friends - was born 17 
April 1912. It was he who gave the company its 
commercial edge, developing the structure so that 
it could compete with the best throughout Italy. 
Under his supervision, the company moved to new 
and larger premises, 4000 sq. metres, on the old 
main road, close to the city's railway station, and 
now employing hundreds of people. It was he, 
Armando, who urged the company to constantly 
modernise itself, bringing in new technology and 
ideas from his constant travels abroad. Clients of 
the company now include government organs, such 
as its Printing and Publishing Department and the 
Ministry of Education, as well as other large public 
and private sector businesses, including banks. Di 
Mauro, as a company, has been rewarded with 
many honours for its work, such as a Gold Medal 
with Merit, in 1957, from the local Chamber of 
Commerce. For its publishing work, it has received 
the " Premio della Presidenza del Consiglio dei 
Ministri" in 1965, and the "Premio Daria Borghe-
se" in 1967. In 1968, on the Fortieth Anniversary 
of the Founding of the Republic of Italy. Di 
Mauro, as an individual, has also received much 
public recognition for his efforts, receiving the 
honour of "Cavaliere al Merito della Repubblica" 
from the Italian Prime Minister, and "Capo di La-
voro" from the Italian President.
