The farmers of Cava have been growing tobacco 
here for nearly two hundred years, following the 
introduction of the crop by Gioacchino Murat to 
the Kingdom of Naples in 1810. A law of the time 
actually encouraged farmers and people in the 
province of Salerno to start cultivation of tobacco, 
by making public pronouncements on the eco-
nomic advantages the "erbasanta" (literally, "holy 
weed") would bring to the area. Under the Bourbon 
rulers of the time, investment in innovation in the 
cultivation and production was significant though, 
at the same time, the Government declared the ac-
tivity a State Monopoly. Land used for its cultiva-
tion was limited to the area around Cava and 
Salerno, with this gradually being enlarged to the 
whole of the territory of Salerno in the following 
years. The money earned by Cava was not incon-
siderable, and it became the centre of the local to-
bacco-production economy. In 1846, a factory, 
notable for the bright red coat of paint the building 
was given, was established in Cava by a local Nea-
politan company, Santissima Apostoli. With the 
Risorgimento, and the downfall of the Bourbons, 
little changed, indeed the economic wheels started 
to turn faster and faster as new investment came to 
the area. The State Agency that oversaw the pro-
duction of tobacco decided to enlarge its storage 
and pre-manufacturing premises by renting the 
Conservatorio of Santa Maria del Rifugio, once the 
barracks of a local infantry battalion stationed at 
Cava. Today, the buildings of the old Agency 
house the local "Istituto Tecnico Commerciale per 
Geometri" (in effect, the Design and Building Sci-
ences Technical College), while the new premises 
lie next to the Central Railway station, covering an 
area of 20,000 sq. metres. Cava still produces ciga-
rettes today, brands such as " Ammezzato, To-
scano, Toscanelli, and Garibaldi", along with a 
specific range of cigars (similar to those produced 
in Lucca) which are admired by connoisseurs of 
tobacco the world over.
