The Church of Santa Maria del Quadruviale (liter-
ally, "of the crossroads") found in San Adiutore, is 
one of the oldest and architecturally most interest-
ing churches in Cava. Its present form dates back 
to the end of the fifteenth century, though it was 
originally constructed in 1383, and it was built 
possibly to replace the earlier local chapel of Santa 
Maria a Toro. As a local historian once com-
mented, "On the lands of Siepi was erected the 
Church of Santa Maria, which, because it was situ-
ated close to a crossroads, was called 'of the cross-
roads'. Built upon a small ridge, to the left there is 
a large Oratorio for use by the founding religious 
Order. Its origin is commonly held to be of the 
fourteenth century. It was used also as a Hospital 
as well as a Hospice for pilgrims". The Church is 
built upon traditional lines, using much of the local 
dark grey, pipernoid tufo, volcanic stone to give 
balance in form and colour, and its western front 
displays much in common with the famous Church 
of Santa Maria Novella in Florence. The building 
is topped by a "lanternino" that sits astride an im-
pressive majolica dome. The bell-tower, which 
stands to the side of the Church, is also decorated 
with majolica and notable carvings, and rises to six 
levels. All in all, the Church of Santa Maria del 
Quadruviale stands as permanent witness to the 
skill and artistry of local architects and stonema-
sons of late fifteenth century Cava. Of late, the 
Church has suffered from the effects of time, van-
dalism and theft. Inside the Church could once be 
found a fourteenth century triptych, by Battista di 
Capua, this has now been removed by the Super-
intendent in Salerno for reasons of security. At the 
entrance to the Oratorio there is a three-arched 
loggia which was once richly furnished with a 
number of fixtures and fittings. The adjoining 
Hospice for pilgrims recalls a time when the 
Church was an important stopping-point for trav-
ellers and pilgrims on the Via Maggiore that ran 
east-west between Nuceria (modern-day Nocera) 
and Salernum (modern-day Salerno).
