The history of Cava can effectively be split into
two, an earlier (from the eleventh to the fifteenth
century) and a later history that runs down to the
present day. Of the earlier period, the Metellian
valley has witnessed two distinct phases. The first
phase saw Cava develop under the supervision of
the Benedictine Abbey at Badia, founded in 1011
by Alferio Pappacarbone, later to be sanctified as
San Alferio. The second phase saw the confirma-
tion of the Università di Cava (effectively, the
Town Council), as the governing body of the new
City by Pope Bonifacio IX in 1394. It was a public
acknowledgement by the Vatican and the Abbey at
Badia as well as by other local feudal powers of
Cava's coming of age, and its right to control its
own economic, commercial and political affairs.
For the abbey at Badia it possibly signified the end
of their enormous power, which had once domi-
nated affairs as far as Cilento, far to the south of
the City of Salerno. In 1460, the City of Cava was
given a blank Charter by the grateful King Ferrante
I of Aragon for services rendered to the Hapsburg
armies. The Mayor was invited to write whatsoever
privileges the city wished. Proudly, but perhaps
foolishly, the Mayor wrote nothing! To this day,
this blank Charter remains in the archives held at
the Town Hall. In 1495, Carlo VII honoured the
City with the title of State Property. On the com-
mercial side, the citizens, following education at
the school of Badia, quickly began to excel at
business, with the cloth they produced soon be-
coming greatly demanded at all the great Italian
Courts of the time for its quality and design. But
the skills of the craftsmen of Cava was not limited
just to the production of cloth, they also should
their skill and professionalism in the building and
decoration of magnificent churches and houses. An
example still to be seen today, and of which the
City of Cava is rightly proud, are its wonderful late
medieval-early renaissance "Portici" (literally,
covered walkways or arcades). These were con-
structed so that local tradesmen and shopkeepers
could go about their daily business of production
and selling their wares without suffering from the
inconvenience of any adverse weather.
