In their history, the Cavese have seen much blood-
shed and intrigue. In 1528, French soldiers under 
Lautrec, landed at Salerno, and sacked and occu-
pied the city as punishment for help local citizens 
had given Charles V of the Spain, in blocking an 
earlier advance by French troops across Cava ter-
ritory towards Naples. Again in 1647, the Cavese 
were actively involved in insurrection, this time in 
the revolt led by Masaniello. Though the Cavese 
numbered only about one-third of the total, they 
were instrumental in the action, with two of their 
number, Don Giulio Genoino (the main instigator) 
and Marco Vitale, taking leading parts. Later, in 
1799, when Napoleonic troops were marching on 
Naples, a city already abandoned by its Bourbon 
rulers, the Cavese made their presence felt on the 
invading armies. On their arrival in the grand city, 
on 23 January 1799, the Partenope Republic was 
declared by the French commander on behalf of 
the people. Like all the other towns and cities in 
the region, following this action the keys to the 
City of Cava were required to be taken to the local 
French commander by its First Citizen. The French 
commander at Torre received this offer of submis-
sion from Cava's then mayor, Nicola Adinolfi. On 
his return, he was also required to plant a Tree of 
Liberty in the main City Square and tear down the 
old Royal insignia of the Bourbon kings from the 
Town Hall. Soon after, serious divisions began to 
appear between the local administration and occu-
pying French troops. Sailors from Cetara, on the 
Amalfi coast, some fifteen kilometres from Cava, 
started the uprising, which quickly spread to the 
nearby small port of Vietri sul Mare and the out-
lying villages of Cava. In Santa Lucia, under the 
orders of Vincenzo Baldi and the Autuori brothers, 
local people took control of the administrative of-
fices and re-installed its former staff. Later that 
spring, on 27 April, a band of French soldiers un-
der General Watrim followed local insurgents re-
treating towards Cava. Aware of the danger the 
Cavese, under the charge of Captain Vincenzo 
Baldi, confronted the onward-coming French sol-
diers by the bridge of Santa Lucia, cutting the 
bridge to halt their advance. The Cavese were be-
trayed when an unknown local traitor showed 
Watrim another crossing point over the river. Cava 
was attacked and sacked.
