Welcome to Cava de' Tirreni, the smiling city in the province of Salerno, in southern Italy. At 
only three kilometres from the Amalfi coast, and seven kilometres from Salerno, it is well-
positioned for trips to Pompeii, Naples, Paestum, and other major places of interest in Cam-
pania. With a temperate climate, a guaranteed warm welcome from its well-known hotels, and its 
links to all the major centres in the area, it is one of the favourite centres for tourists, both from 
Italy and abroad. It is an important centre for agriculture, commerce, and industry (textiles, 
clothing, leather, printing, furniture, tobacco and construction machinery), and is the home of 
one of the most important centres of household and decorative ceramic production in the world. 
Historically, it grew up under the shadow and protection of the powerful Abbey of the Holy 
Trinity, founded in1011 by Alferio Pappacarbone (later to become St Alferio), sited in Badia di 
Cava, in the mountains overlooking the city. In 1394, the town was awarded city status by Pope 
Boniface IX, later to become Crown territory under Charles VII. In 1460, it was given a blank 
Charter by the grateful King Ferrante I of Aragon for services rendered to the Hapsburgs. The 
Mayor was invited to write whatsoever privileges the city wished. Proudly, but perhaps fool-
ishly, the Mayor wrote nothing! To this day, this blank Charter remains in the archives held at 
the Town Hall. In the seventeenth century, the production of cloth from Cava achieved national 
fame, with Naples and the other major Italian cities clamouring for its famous material. Produc-
tion was centred in the merchant quarter, close to the "Borgo delgli Scacciaventi, which still to-
day retains its particular style of stone arcades and beautiful houses, decorated by local crafts-
men in stucco and wrought-iron balconies. The Castle of St Adiutore, with its pine wood "La 
Serra", situated on a hill overlooking Cava, is still seen as the symbol of the city. Back in 1656, 
following redemption from the ravages of the Plague, a "Te Deum" was sung from the highest 
tower in the village of Annunziata, Cava. Still today, an annual festival that has run for over 
three hundred years is celebrated, commemorating the city's escape from a terrible end.