San Alferio, the founder of the Abbey of the Holy 
Trinity at Badia, Cava, was a local aristocrat from 
Salerno who, in 1011 decided to take up a life of 
meditation, and retreat to a cave, the "Arsiccia", in 
the hills above Cava. Before taking up a religious 
life, he worked as on the diplomatic staff of the lo-
cal prince of Salerno, Guaimario III. Soon it be-
came necessary to build a monastery of modest 
size near the spot, as his fame had begun to attract 
many followers to the area. San Alferio, however, 
refused to move to the nearby building, preferring 
to remain within the cave until his death on 12 
April 1050. For the next two hundred years, the 
Monastery was favoured by being led by men of 
outstanding ability. Apart from the founder, an-
other ten of its Abbots were recognised by the 
Vatican either by sanctification or beatification. 
Those sanctified were San Leone I, 1050-79; S. 
Pietro I, 1079-1123; and San Costabile, 1123-24. 
Those beatified were B. Simeone, 1124-40; B. Fal-
cone, 1140-45; B. Marino, 1145-70; B. Benincasa, 
1171-94; B. Pietro II, 1195-1208; B. Balsamo, 
1208-32; B. Leonardo, 1232-55; B. Tommaso, 
1255-64; B. Giacomo, 1264-66; B. Americo, 1264-
68; and B. Leone II, 1268-95. Outstanding among 
these was Pietro I, the nephew of Alferio, who 
greatly enlarged the Monastery, making it a potent 
force within the monastic community of Southern 
Italy. With hundreds of dependent churches and 
monasteries spread across the area, more than three 
thousand monks were soon ordained into the serv-
ice of Badia. In 1092, Pope Urban II, one of the 
greatest Popes of the medieval Catholic Church, a 
friend of Pietro I from when they were at Cluny 
together, even visited Badia to consecrate the new 
Basilica. Another great leader of the Monastery at 
Badia was Benincasa, who sent a hundred monks 
to the famous Abbey of Monreale, Sicilia, in 1176. 
All the great lords of feudal society in Southern It-
aly, from Popes and Princes to Bishops and 
Knights, saw the interest in developing Badia. 
They donated privileges and gifts, property and 
rights of patronage over local churches and mon-
asteries, with the Vatican conceding the Privilege 
of Exemption. In return, the Monastery of Badia 
played its part in the development of the civic so-
ciety of its time. It quickly became a cornerstone in 
the area of the Church's fight against dissent from 
Rome and anti-Papal sentiment. However, at the 
same time, it fought long and hard against the am-
bitions of jealousy in the area, of the Bishops of 
Amalfi-Cava and other powers, spiritual and tem-
poral, to maintain its vast possessions and ensure 
its independence and direct links to Rome. Under 
the instruction of San Costabile and Beatificato 
Simeone, it built the Castello dell'Angelo, later to 
be known as Castellabate (literaly, Castle Abbey) 
in Cilento, to defend against Turkish incursions. 
The monks built and managed hospitals and hos-
pices, and acted at pastors to dependent religious 
centres across the South of Italy, earning a name 
for themselves as wise counsellors on matters both 
temporal and spiritual. The fourteenth century saw 
the Abbey of the Holy Trinity at Badia take a 
breath and consolidate its gains. Much time and ef-
fort was spent on developing its physical defences 
and on securing its great artistic wealth and posi-
tion of political power in the region. The Abbots of 
this period were Don Rainaldo, 1295-1300; Don 
Roberto, 1301-11; Don Bernardo, 1311-16; Don 
Filippo de Haya, 1316-31; Don Gottardo, 1332-40; 
Don Manerio, 1340-66; Don Golferio, 1366-74; 
Don Antonio, 1374-83; and Don Ligorio de Maio-
rinis, 1383-94. Possibly they lacked the charisma 
of their earlier colleagues, but were skilled and 
clever administrators, something essential in this 
age of retrenchment and new fears for Church and 
Society. In 1394, under Pope Bonifacio IX, Cava 
was given city status and, at the same time, Cava 
was elevated to a diocese, with its own independ-
ent Bishop, who would reside at Badia. The Mo-
nastic church became a cathedral, and the Monas-
tery of Badia would no longer be governed by an 
Abbot, but rather by a Prior, with a council of 
monks making up the cathedral chapter. The Bish-
ops of Cava were: Mons. Francesco de Aiello, 
1394-1407; Mons. Francesco de Mormilis, 1407-
19; Mons. Sagax de Comitibus, 1419-26; and 
Mons. Angelotto Fusco, 1426-44. This last Bishop, 
who was elevated to the rank of Cardinal, sought to 
have the title "in commendam" because of the 
enormous wealth and privilege that went with the 
job. Indeed, during the fourteenth and fifteenth 
centuries, the Abbey of Badia became one of the 
richest and most profitable sinecures available for 
suitable candidates in the Catholic Church in Italy. 
Successive cardinals who ruled at Badia were: 
Luigi Scarampa, 1444-65; Giovanni d’Aragona, 
1465-85; and Oliviero Carafa, 1485-97. These 
were all rich and powerful men, favourites of the 
Hapsburg dynasty, who brought intrigue and deca-
dence, rather than simple and charitable life, to the 
Abbey. For their interests, reflecting those of the 
Courts of the Vatican and Madrid, were of the 
spoils of a temporal, not spiritual, life. The last of 
these Cardinals, Oliviero Carafa, however, did 
provide some interested service to the Abbey by 
bringing it close links to the famous "Congregazi-
one Cassinese" of San Giustino da Padova. On re-
felection though, the spiritual life of the Abbey de-
clined rapidly under these courtesans, attracting 
few honest men to its ranks, and bringing the fa-
mous religious centre to the brink of collapse. The 
Vatican sought to restore its control again, on the 
death of Cardinal Carafa, bringing in an Abbot 
temporarily to restore monastic discipline, as well 
as return the Collegio to its status of a centre of 
learning in arts and sciences. Among the tireless 
men who worked to restore the abbey to its previ-
ous condition were: the Abbot Don. Vittorio 
Manso, who founded the Great Library, the Abbot 
Don Alessandro Ridolfi, the first great historian of 
Badia, and Don Agostino Venereo, archivist and 
organiser of the thousands of records lying on de-
posit at the Abbey. Men of devotion also began to 
loom large at Badia in the period of religious wars 
that swept mainland Europe in the first half of the 
seventeenth century. The Vatican's renewed preoc-
cupation with orthodoxy and learning brought such 
men of rank as Don Zaccaria Capograsso (1633), 
Don Agostino (1638), and Don Benedetto Zitelli of 
Cava (1648). On an architectural level, the build-
ings of the Abbey were also renovated during this 
period of upheaval and temporal enrichment, with 
the Cathedral, the seminary, and the Noviciate, 
along with various other aspects of the Abbey be-
ing rebuilt by Abbot Giolio de Palma. Again, this 
time thanks to the dextrous manoeuvring of its Ab-
bot, Don Carlo Mazzacane, the Abbey was able to 
ride out another diplomatic storm, this time as a re-
sult of the Napoleonic Suppression of the Church. 
Following the ejection of the Bourbons from 
Naples, and the crowning of a Buonaparte at 
Naples, the Abbey was effectively "disestab-
lished", with most of its staff turned out. The Ab-
bot, Don Mazzacane, pleaded successfully to 
maintain a skeleton "guard" of 25 monks to run the 
"Stabilimento" (as the Abbey of Badia was referred 
to during this brief interlude), and was himself re-
tained as "Director". Following the re-
establishment of Bourbon power, a new era of re-
ligious discipline returned to reinvigorate the spirit 
of the Abbey. In 1844, two of its senior members, 
Don Giuseppe Serra and Don Rudesindo Salvado, 
left for missionary duties in the British colony of 
Australia, going on to found an Abbey there. In 
1866, following the reorganisation under "Il Risor-
gimento", the Abbey, along with many similar sites 
in Italy, was declared a National Monument. At-
tention was paid to the great treasures it housed, 
and much time and work began to be spent cata-
loguing and inspecting the half-forgotten hoard. 
From this work came two benefits, first the open-
ing of a new lay school, which still flourishes to-
day, as well as the publishing of the " Codex Dip-
lomaticus Cavensis", a complete list of all the old-
est parchment documents (justly recognised today 
as being of world-class importance) held on de-
posit at Badia. The greatest names from that era 
were Don Guglielmo Sanfelice, Cardinal and 
Archbishop of Naples, and Michele Morcaldi, 
compiler of a famous Greek vocabulary text. The 
work of these men continues today. Following in 
the footsteps of their predecessors, such as Monsi-
gnor Placido Nicolini and Monsignor Ildefonso 
Rea, today's monks at the Abbey continue the work 
of the SS.Padri Cavensi (literally, "Holy Fathers of 
Cava"). Their humble task is to reinvigorate the 
life, spirit, and hope at the Abbey, as it moves to-
wards the Third Millennium after Christ, and its 
own second Millennium.









