In 1025, the original church, as constructed by Al-
fiero, consisted of a single nave. In 1092, under the 
orders of Abbot Pietro I, it was enlarged, with ot-
her naves being added to the structure, transfor-
ming the earlier church into a prepossessing Basi-
lica. The present Basilica originates from 1761, de-
signed by the architect Giovanni del Gaizo who, 
some years later, also designed the ornate Baroque 
front. It replaced the old basilica, which was com-
pletely rebuilt, except for the Chapel of the Holy 
Fathers and some of the original foundations. The 
inside of the building, which is light and harmo-
nious, is decorated in multi-coloured marble. The 
first thing that strikes the visitor is the recently re-
structured twelfth-century High Altar, which was 
probably a gift from Ruggiero II, King of Sicily, 
who wanted that his second wife Sibilla, who died 
in Salerno in 1150, be buried at Badia. A magnifi-
cent tomb to this dead queen can still be seen in the 
Basilica. The original Chapel of the Holy Fathers, 
restructured with Florentine mosaic in 1641, is still 
extant. Immediately in front of this, after the "ba-
laustra", can be found four impressive fifteenth-
century marble statues of San Felicità and San 
Matteo. Further on, to the right, is the original cave 
dwelling of San Alferio, whose remains are kept in 
an urn under the Altar of San Leone. This Altar 
lies to the left, along with other saints relics buried 
in the wall. In front, is the Altar of the Holy Sa-
crament, which contains the remains of San Costa-
bile. The paintings of the Basilica are generally 
those of the Calabrian artist, Vincenzo Morani, da-
ting from 1857. On the vault over the choir, there 
is a picture of  "San Alferio contemplating the 
Holy Trinity"; on the dome, a vision of the Apo-
calypse, "The Adoration of the Redeemer". On the 
transept to the right, there is a picture of "The 
Death of San Benedetto", along with other pictures 
of his life, and of the lives of other Benedictine and 
non-Benedictine saints; to the left, a depiction of 
"The Resurrection" with the Prophets and 
Apostles. His major work on canvas, however, 
"The Deposition of The Cross" is to be found on 
the Altar of the left transept. Other notable works 
include the painting of "San Mauro", by Achille 
Guerra, to be found on the first Altar to the right of 
the main entrance; the sixteenth century Baptistery 
Door on the left; and, the marble portal to the Sa-
cristy, with its wonderful fifteenth century door. 
Under the twelve Altars of the Basilica can be 
found the remains of the twelve sanctified abbots 
and their beatified colleagues.
