Nicola di Mauro was born 8 July 1904 in the six-
teenth-century Palazzo Vitagliano, in the old 
Borgo Scacciaventi of Cava. From an early age he 
displayed a particular predilection for the physical 
life, involving himself in boxing and walking and 
climbing in the local mountains. At the age of 
thirteen, he was sent to the Collegio di San Bene-
detto at Badia, but his boisterous approach to 
school required that he leave, and so he transferred 
to the Liceo "Tasso" in Salerno, where he gradu-
ated in 1923. Within three months, he had entered 
the Regia Accademia Aeronautica, deciding to 
make his career as a pilot. He first flew in an air-
ship, but then progressed to seaplanes, going on to 
learn to fly planes at Pisa's San Giusto airport. In 
July 1926, he was made a pilot, promoted to Flight 
Sublieutenant, and sent to Air School at Aviano, 
where he was promoted to full Lieutenant a year 
later. Some time later, he was involved in the Air 
Festival in the presence of Mussolini, at the Pere-
tola Airfield, Firenze. On 12 May 1934, at Monte-
celio, Nicola di Mauro was aboard a Savoia 
Marchetti with Sergeant-Major Giorgio Olivari, 
when he broke the world altitude record for flying 
2000-kilogram planes. He was awarded with the 
Gold medal for Athletic Valour for this achieve-
ment by Mussolini. Three years later, in 1937, 
along with his friend Mario Stoppani and the rac-
ing driver Guglielmo Randoli, he broke four world 
records for altitude flying in a seaplane. A new, 
world record for altitude flying, this time in a pis-
ton-driven seaplane came in the autumn of 1939. 
In little more than an hour, he had flown to the 
height of 13,542 metres. On 7 September 1943, at 
Perugia, the (by now) Lieutenant-Colonel di 
Mauro flew his last sortie for the Italian Air Force 
in war. He was promoted to Colonel (Reserve) in 
January 1957. On retirement, he was appointed 
Vice-President of ECA ( an organisation oversee-
ing public social funding). He died on 9 September 
1979.
