There has been a branch of  Club Alpino Italiano 
(CAI) promoting the interests of ramblers, trek-
kers and hillwalkers in Cava de' Tirreni for al-
most sixty years. The City of Cava - lying in  the 
lush Metellian Valley at the foot of the Lattari 
Hills, situated some four kilometres from the Bay 
of Salerno, at an altitude of 195 metres above 
sea-level - has long been famous for its green 
countryside and woodland walks. The Valley is 
cut in a North-South direction by major lines of 
communication: the “Autostrada del Sole” (the 
Sunny Motorway) and the main railway line to-
wards Naples and the north. The Metellian Val-
ley slopes down to the Tyrrhenian Sea at the 
junction between the dunes of the Bay of Salerno 
and the eastern end of the breathtaking cliffs of 
the Amalfitan Coast. The Amalfitan Coast then 
stretches westward towards the Island of Capri, 
the Sorrentino Coast, the Plain of Vesuvius and 
the Bay of Naples.
The Metellian Valley and its surrounding hills - 
the Lattari Hills to the west and the Picentini 
Hills, rising majestically above Salerno and the 
Irno Valley to the east -  are made up of calcare-
ous rock formations and offers the visitor many 
interesting and varied trips. The vegetation is 
typically Mediterranean, with splendid orchids, 
lilies, clumps of violets and interesting varieties 
of fern to be found on mountain walks. One of 
the best walks in the area, described as the 
“Lattari High Road” trek in the CAI Trekking 
Handbook of 1989, starts from the Abbey of Ba-
dia di Cava, to the west of Cava, crosses the 
chestnut woods of Cappella Vecchia and goes on 
to either the summit of Monte Avvocata (1014 
metres above sea-level) or drops down to Santu-
ario dell’Avvocata (873 metres above sea-level). 
The footpath, labelled ‘Number 12’ in the hand-
book, leads on to the northern edge of Monte 
Finestra (1138 metres above sea-level), passing 
Pietrapiana and the Tramontane Valley. To the 
east of Cava, meanwhile, one can find relatively 
easier walks and fine views over the Valley of 
Cava and the Bay of Salerno. Here the visitor can 
stumble across the old towers used by past gen-
erations to catch birds, especially pigeons, as 
they migrated south in autumn. This tradition, 
known locally as the “Giocca” (literally, the 
“game”), goes back over a thousand years to 
Lombard times. Here the footpath, labelled 
‘Number 18’ in the handbook, crosses the eastern 
hills overlooking Cava from Mount Caruso to 
Mount San Liberatore, and offers a number of 
different, easily accessible walks.

