In the first week of July, every year, the City Sta-
dium of “Simonetta Lamberti” hosts the 
“Challenge of the Trumpeteers”, a festival that re-
calls the famous intervention by Cavese soldiers at 
the Battle of  Sarno, on behalf of their Aragonese 
masters. In 1460, without any request from the the 
Spanish King Ferdinand I of Aragon, five hundred 
Cava soldiers went to the assistance of his belea-
guered troops who were under attack from the 
French Army of John of Anjou. Under the leader-
ship of the Longo brothers, the Cava troops at-
tacked the French from the mountains overlooking 
the village of Foce. The bloody battle, that lasted 
for more than a day, saved the Spanish, forcing the 
French to flee the area. But the French did not 
leave the area without sacking the City of Cava 
which, in turn, was saved by Spanish intervention 
by way of troops newly-arrived in Amalfi. On 31 
July 1460, King Ferdinand, as an expression of his 
gratitude, sent a letter to the Council of Cava stat-
ing that whatever his “friends” in Cava wished 
from him would be honoured. Later, on 14 Sep-
tember 1460, not having received any response 
from the citizens of Cava, the Spanish king sent a 
second letter enclosing a plain white parchment, 
signed personally. This time it was sent direct to 
the hand of the Mayor, Onofrio Scannapieco, re-
confirming the king’s gratitude and requesting that 
the First Citizen write whatsoever the City re-
quested on the enclosed parchment. The parchment 
remained within the city, the citizens refusing to 
require a price from Ferdinand for their support. It 
remains to this day in the archives of the Town 
Hall of Cava, representing the prize of “The Chal-
lenge of the Trumpeters”. Today, the Challenge re-
calls those long past days of glory, and attracts 
visitors from far and wide. It is a wonderful day-
long spectacle, and consists of a competition of 
flag-waving, marching etc, in traditional fifteenth 
century costume of as an expression of his grati-
tude the four quarters of the City of Cava, each 
quarter putting forward their two groups of trum-
peters.
